ML classifier notebook cleanup and add new algorithms (#222)
fornax-navo/fornax-demo-notebooks: light_curves/light_curve_classifier.md

#figure out which columns in the dataframe are flux columns
flux_cols = [col for col in df_lc.columns if 'flux' in col]

# make new normalized flux columns for all fluxes
df_lc[flux_cols] = df_lc[flux_cols].div(df_lc['max_W1'], axis=0)

#now drop max_W1 as a column so it doesn't get included as a variable in multivariate analysis
df_lc.drop(columns = ['max_W1'], inplace = True)
```

### 2.8 Make datetime column
https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html#module-datetime

SKTime wants a datetime column

```{code-cell} ipython3
#need to convert df_lc time into datetime
mjd = df_lc.time

#convert to JD
jd = mjd_to_jd(mjd)

#convert to individual components
t = Time(jd, format = 'jd' )

#t.datetime is now an array of type datetime
#make it a column in the dataframe
df_lc['datetime'] = t.datetime
```

### 2.9 Save this dataframe

```{code-cell} ipython3
#save this dataframe to use for the ML below so we don't have to make it every time
parquet_savename = 'output/df_lc_ML.parquet'
df_lc.to_parquet(parquet_savename)
#print("file saved!")
```

### 2.10 Make into multi-index
(which is what SKTime expects as input)

```{code-cell} ipython3

> df_lc = df_lc.set_index(["objectid", "label", "datetime"])

Author: yes, I see your point that it is not needed until 4.1.  At the same time, I worked hard to get the train test split to work on the data frame with indices, so it would take me a long time to re-write that without the multiindex.  Maybe this is somewhere that I could learn from you.  I'll make it an issue and we can consider it going forward.

from sktime.classification.kernel_based import Arsenal, RocketClassifier
from sktime.classification.shapelet_based import ShapeletTransformClassifier
from sktime.registry import all_estimators, all_tags

> from pyts.classification import KNeighborsClassifier

Author: we figured out that this was for `pyst` and not `pyts` so I will leave `pyts` in this PR, but consider if it is possible to use a time series directly with sklearn for a future PR.

- objects with no measurements in WISE W1 band

```{code-cell} ipython3
def sigmaclip_lightcurves(df_lc, sigmaclip_value = 10.0, include_plot = False):
    """
    Sigmaclip to remove bad values from the light curves; optionally plots histograms of uncertainties
        to help determine sigmaclip_value from the data. 
    
    Parameters
    ----------
    df_lc: Pandas dataframe with light curve info
   
    sigmaclip_value: float
        what value of sigma should be used to make the cuts

    include_plot: bool
        have the function plot histograms of uncertainties for each band
        
    Returns
    --------
    df_lc: MultiIndexDFObject with all  light curves
        
    """
    #keep track of how many rows this removes

>     start_len = len(df_lc)

Author: changed both instances of this length check.

    #setup to collect the outlier thresholds per band to later reject
    nsigmaonmean= {}

    if include_plot:
        #create the figure and axes
        fig, axs = plt.subplots(5, 3, figsize = (12, 12))

        # unpack all the axes subplots
        axe = axs.ravel()

    #for each band
    for count, (bandname, singleband) in enumerate(df_lc.groupby("band")):
    
        #use scipy sigmaclip to iteratively determine sigma on the dataset
        clippedarr, lower, upper = sigmaclip(singleband.err, low = sigmaclip_value, high = sigmaclip_value)
    
        #store this value for later
        nsigmaonmean[bandname] = upper
    
        if include_plot:        
            #plot distributions and print stddev
            singleband.err.plot(kind = 'hist', bins = 30, subplots =True, ax = axe[count],label = bandname+' '+str(upper), legend=True)

    #remove data that are outside the sigmaclip_value

>     for bandname, cut in nsigmaonmean.items():
>         querystring = f'band == {bandname!r} & err > {cut}'
>         df_lc = df_lc.drop(df_lc.query(querystring).index)

Reviewer: You can avoid changing the input dataframe by naming the result of the query/drop operation something else. This would be straightforward if it weren't inside a loop. So I think I would do this (syntax may not be 100% correct):

```suggestion
    # one querystring with all cuts, joined by "or"
    querystring = " | ".join(f'(band == {bandname!r} & err > {cut})' for bandname, cut in nsigmaonmean.items())
    # name the result something else so that df_lc is unchanged
    clipped_df_lc = df_lc.drop(df_lc.query(querystring).index)
    # continue on using `clipped_df_lc`, then return it
```

Now when you (or the user) call the function, you are free to replace `df_lc` with the result if you want (`df_lc = sigmaclip_lightcurves(df_lc)`, and the main notebook does not need a new variable for every function), but you're not forced to change `df_lc` by the internal workings of the function. I think there are various performance and debugging reasons to prefer this, but it's also just nice for functions not to alter their input variables because that can be unexpected and confusing to a user who didn't want that.

    
        #use scipy sigmaclip to iteratively determine sigma on the dataset
        clippedarr, lower, upper = sigmaclip(singleband.err, low = sigmaclip_value, high = sigmaclip_value)
    
        #store this value for later
        nsigmaonmean[bandname] = upper
    
        if include_plot:        
            #plot distributions and print stddev
            singleband.err.plot(kind = 'hist', bins = 30, subplots =True, ax = axe[count],label = bandname+' '+str(upper), legend=True)

    #remove data that are outside the sigmaclip_value
    #make one large querystring joined by "or" for all bands in df_lc
    querystring = " | ".join(f'(band == {bandname!r} & err > {cut})' for bandname, cut in nsigmaonmean.items())
    clipped_df_lc = df_lc.drop(df_lc.query(querystring).index)

    #how much data did we remove with this sigma clipping?
    #This should inform our choice of sigmaclip_value.

    end_len = len(clipped_df_lc.index)
    fraction = (start_len - end_len) / start_len
    print(f"This {sigmaclip_value} sigma clipping removed {fraction}% of the rows in df_lc")

    return clipped_df_lc
```

```{code-cell} ipython3

> def remove_objects_without_W1(df_lc, verbose=False):

Author: good point, I turned bandname_to_drop into a variable for the function instead of hard coding it in.

        print( dropcount, "objects do not have W1 fluxes and were removed")

    return dropW1_df_lc
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
def remove_incomplete_data(df_lc, threshold_too_few = 3):
    """
    Remove those light curves that don't have enough data for classification.
       
    Parameters
    ----------
    df_lc: Pandas dataframe with light curve info

    threshold_too_few: Int
        Define what the threshold is for too few datapoints.
        
    Returns
    --------
    df_lc: MultiIndexDFObject with all  light curves
        
    """

    #how many groups do we have before we start
    print(df_lc.groupby(["band", "objectid"]).ngroups, "n groups before")

    #use pandas .filter to remove small groups
    complete_df_lc = df_lc.groupby(["band", "objectid"]).filter(lambda x: len(x) > threshold_too_few)

    #how many groups do we have after culling?
    print(complete_df_lc.groupby(["band", "objectid"]).ngroups, "n groups after")

    return complete_df_lc
    
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
#one panstarrs z has a crazy err value of -999000, definitely don't want to include that one
querystring = 'err < -100'
df_lc = df_lc.drop(df_lc.query(querystring).index)

> 

Author: done.

#variable objects, but remove instrumental noise and CR (ground based).
sigmaclip_value = 10.0
df_lc = sigmaclip_lightcurves(df_lc, sigmaclip_value, include_plot = False)

#remove objects without W1 fluxes
#We want to normalize all light curves by W1, so we neeed to remove those 
#without W1 fluxes as there will be nothing to normalize those light curves 
#with and we don't want to have un-normalized data or data that has been 
#normalized by a different band.  
df_lc = remove_objects_without_W1(df_lc, verbose=True)

#remove incomplete data
#Some bands in some objects have only a few datapoints. Three data points 
#is not large enough for KNN interpolation, so we will consider any array 
#with fewer than 4 photometry points to be incomplete data.  Another way 
#of saying this is that we choose to remove those light curves with 3 or 
#fewer data points.
threshold_too_few = 3
df_lc = remove_incomplete_data(df_lc, threshold_too_few)
    
```

### 2.4 Missing Data
Some objects do not have light curves in all bands.  Some ML algorithms can handle mising data, but not all, so it would be useful to handle this missing data up front.

There are two options here

> 1) We will add light curves with zero flux and err values for the missing data.  SKtime does not like NaNs, so we chose zeros.

Author: I think handling missing data in time-series classification is a bigger topic, and one of concern for how the algorithms work , which is probably deeper than an sktime issue.  In other words, I need to learn more about this to suggest other ways of doing this work, but for now, we will stick with pragmatic

    # "explode" the dataframe to get one row per light curve point. time, flux, and err columns will now store floats.
    df_empty = df_empty.explode(["time", "flux","err"], ignore_index=True)
    df_empty = df_empty.astype({col: "float" for col in ["time", "flux", "err"]})

    #now put the empty light curves back together with the main light curve dataframe
    zeros_df_lc = pd.concat([df_lc, df_empty])

    return(zeros_df_lc)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
def missingdata_drop_bands(df_lc, verbose = False):
    """
    Drop bands with the most missing data and objects without all remaining bands so that there is no missing data going forward.
       
    Parameters
    ----------
    df_lc: Pandas dataframe with light curve info
    
    verbose: bool
    
    Returns
    --------
    df_lc: MultiIndexDFObject with all  light curves
        
    """

    #try instead to require that all objects have bands = df_lc.band.unique()

    #first drop the bands not included from all objects
    bands_to_drop = ['zi', 'Gaia g', 'Gaia bp', 'Gaia rp']
    drop_df_lc = df_lc[~df_lc["band"].isin(bands_to_drop)]
    
    #now a list of all remaining bands

>     all_bands = drop_df_lc.band.unique()

Author: yes, it is a better name.  done.

    
    if verbose:
        #how many objects did we start with?
        print(drop_df_lc.groupby(["objectid"]).ngroups, "n objects before removing missing band data")

    # Identify objects with all bands
    complete_objects = drop_df_lc.groupby('objectid')['band'].apply(lambda x: set(x) == set(all_bands))

    # Filter the DataFrame based on complete objects

>     filter_df_lc = drop_df_lc[drop_df_lc['objectid'].isin(complete_objects[complete_objects].index)]

Reviewer: I'm a bit confused about `complete_objects[complete_objects].index` here, but I think the result is the same as `complete_objects.index`? If so, and if you accept the above suggestion, then this should change to:

```suggestion
    filter_df_lc = drop_df_lc[drop_df_lc['objectid'].isin(complete_objects)]
```

But even looking at that suggestion, I'm confused about what the code is actually doing. I'm only reading, not actually running code, so I can't check for sure. This whole function is fine right now the way it is. So you can make changes if they make sense to you, or leave it as-is.

Author: I'm going to leave this whole function alone and let us come back to it at a later date.

#y are the labels, should be a series 
y_train = train_df.droplevel('datetime').index.unique().get_level_values('label').to_series()
y_test = test_df.droplevel('datetime').index.unique().get_level_values('label').to_series()
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
print(X_train.groupby([ "objectid"]).ngroups, "n groups in train sample")
print(X_test.groupby(["objectid"]).ngroups, "n groups in test sample")
```

## 4. Run sktime algorithms on the light curves

> We choose to use [sktime](https://www.sktime.net/en/stable/index.html) algorithms beacuse it is a library of many algorithms specifically tailored to time series datasets.  It is based on the sklearn library so syntax is familiar to many users.

Author: done.
